---
layout: "@layouts/MarkdownPostLayout.astro"
title: "My thoughts on accessibility overlays"
author: Steve Frenzel
description: Predicting what will happen and a couple useful links.
pubDate: 2024-01-05
slug: my-thoughts-on-accessibility-overlays
tags: ["accessibility"]
image:
  url: ./a11y-overlay.jpeg
  alt: Abstract illustration of different interface layers on a smartphone
---

I predict that Overlay vendors will make a lot of money with their false promise of adding a widget (with AI) to solve all accessibility problems.

Once the first lawsuit comes in because they do not work and worsen the accessibility of a website, users will start suing website owners. In return web site owners aka companies will start suing overlay vendors because they got sued (who could’ve known).

Then comes the part where they hire professionals to ACTUALLY fix their problems.

## Related links

- [European commission on accessibility overlays](https://commission.europa.eu/resources-partners/europa-web-guide/design-content-and-development/accessibility/testing-early-and-regularly/accessibility-overlays_en): It's nice to have it in writing from a big institution that these widgets are scams and will make it worse for certain users.

- [Level Access crosses the line; buys accessibility overlay company](https://yatil.net/blog/level-access-userway): Eric Eggert sharing his thoughts about a accessibility acquiring an overlay vendor, with many useful links.

- [The Many Pitfalls of Accessibility Overlays](https://www.levelaccess.com/blog/the-many-pitfalls-of-accessibility-overlays/): This company wrote an article more than three years ago why these overlays are bad... I expect it to be gone soon, so I attached a screenshot.

- [The financial argument for using an outside firm for accessibility remediation](https://karlgroves.com/the-financial-argument-for-using-an-outside-firm-for-accessibility-remediation/): Somewhat related to the topic, as this is about hiring a person to hand accessibility, no relying just on a widget. Also comes with ROI formulas!
