---
thumbnail: menu-and-navigation.png
title: "Menu and navigation: The difference"
description: The eternal war of buttons against links taken to a new hight and complexity.
pubDate: 2025-04-28
slug: menu-and-navigation-the-difference
tags:
  [
    "html",
    "css",
    "JavaScript",
    "a11y",
    "accessibility",
    "menu",
    "navigation",
    "pagination",
    "carousel",
    "tollwerk",
  ]
image:
  url: ../../../../../public/thumbnails/menu-and-navigation.png
  alt: "Foreground: Menu and navigation: The difference. Background: Three rows of six hamburgers."
---

_Updated on April 29, 2025: Thanks to [James Edwards from TPGi](https://www.tpgi.com/author/brothercake/), who suggested to mention the pagination pattern much later in the article. Cheers! [^1]_

## Table of contents

- [TL;DR](#tldr)
- [Why I'm writing this](#why-im-writing-this)
- [Difference between buttons and links](#difference-between-buttons-and-links)
- [Difference between menu and navigation](#difference-between-menu-and-navigation)
- [What if both are mixed?](#what-if-both-are-mixed)
- [Pagination: The exception?](#pagination-the-exception)
  - [The carousel](#the-carousel)
  - [In short](#in-short)

## TL;DR

A menu is a collection of actions to perform in a document. It has the `role=”menu”` and it’s descendants have the `role=”menuitem”` (or `role=”menuitemcheckbox”` or `role=”menuitemradio”`). Additional keyboard functionality must be added via JavaScript.

A navigation is a collection of links for navigating related documents. You can either use `<nav>` or `role="nav"` to mark it up properly and use `<ul>` and `<li>` for the links. It contains only links, can be build with semantic HTML and needs no additional functionality via JavaScript.

## Why I'm writing this

For whatever reason, a menu is often confused with a navigation and vice versa. Sometimes people just use whatever word comes to mind, regardless of whether it's correct. So I hope this article will be handy reference not only for me, but for you too!

## Difference between buttons and links

If we want to be really accurate, we need to call it anchor element, as the `<link>` element is used in a completely different context and users cannot interact with it: [`<link>`: The External Resource Link Element](https://developer.mozilla.org/en-US/docs/Web/HTML/Reference/Elements/link)

However, since it is very common in this industry to use the wrong name for the right thing, I will also call it link in the following.

This translated explanation from [Gehirngerecht](https://gehirngerecht.digital/button-oder-link/) summarizes very clearly what the fundamental differences are:

> A button does something, while a link takes you somewhere else.
>
> A link refers to another location, which is defined by the `href` attribute.
>
> A button, on the other hand, triggers a specific action, such as submitting a form or opening a menu or modal window.
>
> Both buttons and links can be selected with the keyboard and activated with the `Enter` key.
>
> The button can also be triggered with the space bar.

Let's take a look at the code of a simple button element:

```html
<button type="button">Click me!</button>
```

For comparison a link (aka anchor) element:

```html
<a href="https://www.wikipedia.org/">Wikipedia</a>
```

## Difference between menu and navigation

Here's the definition of a [menu](https://www.w3.org/TR/wai-aria-1.1/#menu), according to the W3C:

> A type of widget that offers a list of choices to the user.
>
> A menu is often a list of common actions or functions that the user can invoke. The menu role is appropriate when a list of menu items is presented in a manner similar to a menu on a desktop application.
>
> To be keyboard accessible, authors SHOULD manage focus of descendants for all instances of this role, as described in Managing Focus.
>
> Elements with the role menu have an implicit aria-orientation value of vertical.

And here's the definition of a [navigation](https://www.w3.org/TR/wai-aria-1.1/#navigation):

> A collection of navigational elements (usually links) for navigating the document or related documents.
>
> User agents SHOULD treat elements with the role of navigation as navigational landmarks.

Based on these explanations, a menu would be a collection of elements such as buttons. It also says that the `aria-orientation` attribute of a menu is vertical by default.

Most navigation elements have a horizontal orientation, which gives us another hint why these two patterns are different. A navigation would be a collection of links.

Pretty clear distinction, right?

## Menu example

There are no limits to the complexity of a menu, so I will use a very simplified example here:

```html
<ul aria-label="Accessibility options" role="menu">
  <li role="presentation">
    <button role="menuitem" type="button">Color contrast</button>
  </li>
  <li role="presentation">
    <button role="menuitem" type="button">Easy language</button>
  </li>
  <li role="presentation">
    <button role="menuitem" type="button">Font size</button>
  </li>
</ul>
```

Even though it’s a very simplified example, there’s still a lot going on here. Let’s unpack it:

[Progressive enhancement](https://www.gov.uk/service-manual/technology/using-progressive-enhancement) is crucial to make sure that custom widgets like this (somewhat) work when no CSS and / or JavaScript is available. There’s no semantic element for a menu and it’s descendants (yet?), so we’re overwriting the roles of our `<ul>`, `<li>` and `<button>` element.

We could’ve used `<div>` elements, but this way it’s easier to read and understand. Also the role of the `<button>` element has changed to `menuitem`, but it still offers all of it’s native functionality.

The element with `role=”menu”` is required to have an accessible name. This can either be achieved by using `aria-label` or `aria-labelledby`.

Waddup with `role=”presentation”`, you might wonder?

This is because a `menuitem` needs to be a direct descendent of an element with `role=”menu”`. Otherwise the first descendent would be the `<li>` element. Read the documentation to find out how it works under the hood: [ARIA: presentation role](https://developer.mozilla.org/en-US/docs/Web/Accessibility/ARIA/Reference/Roles/presentation_role)

But that’s not it, we still need to add a big chunk of keyboard functionality to it:

- The submenu can be displayed by pressing `Space` or `Enter` and moves the focus to the first element or the heading of the submenu
- The submenu can be closed by pressing `Escape`
- You can navigate with the arrow keys

Phew, quite a lot. 🥵 Depending on the complexity, there may be even more requirements for an accessible menu.

A note regarding the [ARIA: menu role](https://developer.mozilla.org/en-US/docs/Web/Accessibility/ARIA/Reference/Roles/menu_role) documentation: The first example shows a list of links turned into a menu. I’m not a fan of that, as this is clearly a navigation, as you can tell by the usage of link elements.

## Navigation example

Significantly less complex, as it’s just a collection of links. It can be created entirely with semantic HTML, which provides full functionality even when CSS and JavaScript are not present.

If we wanted to progressively enhance this pattern, we could add the `aria-current="page"` attribute dynamically to the link of the current page via JavaScript.

If there are several [navigation](https://developer.mozilla.org/en-US/docs/Web/HTML/Reference/Elements/nav) elements present on a page, they have to be marked accordingly using `aria-label` or `aria-labelledby`.

```html
<nav aria-label=“Breadcrumbs”>
  <ul>
    <li>
      <a aria-current="page" href=“/“>Home</a>
    <li>
    <li>
      <a href=“/about“>About</a>
    <li>
    <li>
      <a href=“/blog“>Blog</a>
    <li>
  </ul>
</nav>
```

## What if both are mixed?

Assuming you have a rather complex menu with a section that just contains links, you could mark this specific part of the menu as navigation. But as usual: It depends™.

However, you should always go for the basic mark-up structure of using the `<ul>` and `<li>` element, as this will ensure baseline accessibility and improves code readability.

As far as I understand, once it’s not a real navigation (containing only links) it’s supposed to be marked as a `menu`. Although, there might be an exception:

## Pagination: The exception?

In the W3C Design System, a pagination is clearly a collection of links. Each element leads users to a corresponding page. The complete example can be found at [W3C Design System: Pagination](Pagination). Here's a modified, simplified and shortened example by me:

```html
<nav>
  <ul>
    <li>
      <a href="/previous">Previous</a>
    </li>
    <li>
      <a href="/page-one">1</a>
    </li>
    <li>
      <a href="/page-two" aria-current="page">2</a>
    </li>
    <li>
      <a href="/page-three">3</a>
    </li>
    <li>
      <a href="/next">Next</a>
    </li>
  </ul>
</nav>
```

Here's where you could use a small amount of JavaScript to dynamically mark the current page with `aria-current="page"`.

But what if the link elements “Previous” and “Next” do not lead to the previous and next page? Instead, they're buttons _showing_ the next batch of links instead of _changing_ the current URL. Let's have a look at a slightly modified example:

```html
<nav>
  <ul>
    <li>
      <button type="button">Previous</button>
    </li>
    <li>
      <a href="/page-one">1</a>
    </li>
    <li>
      <a href="/page-two" aria-current="page">2</a>
    </li>
    <li>
      <a href="/page-three">3</a>
    </li>
    <li>
      <button type="button">Next</button>
    </li>
  </ul>
</nav>
```

As the core functionality remains the same, I would still consider this a navigation, even though it contains button elements.

### The carousel

What if the pagination doesn't offer links to navigate to different pages, but instead shows different elements without changing the current URL?

Then we're probably dealing with a content slider / carousel pattern and NOT with a menu, NOR with a navigation. In this case we would also use `aria-current="true"` instead of `aria-current="page"` to represent "the current item within a set." [^2]

A lot has already been written about this pattern and a very detailed article (in German) on the subject was written by [Sonja Weckenmann](https://sonja-weckenmann.de/) from [tollwerk](https://tollwerk.de/): [Barrierefreie Karusells](https://tollwerk.de/projekte/tipps-techniken-inklusiv-barrierefrei/barrierefreie-karussells)

In her example, she labels it as a "carousel" and not as a navigation or menu (example changed and translated):

```html
<div role="region" aria-label="Carousel">
  <!-- Other elements -->
</div>
```

### In short

If all elements of a pagination are links that change the URL, it's a navigation.

If the element for displaying the next or previous batch of links is a `<button>`, but the individual pages are still links, it's a navigation.

If the individual elements are displayed within the same page without changing the current URL, it is neither a menu nor a navigation, but most likely a content slider / carousel pattern.

[^1]: [Message from James Edwards on Mastodon](https://mastodon.world/@siblingpastry/114415966312903649)

[^2]: [Documentation of `aria-current="true"`](https://developer.mozilla.org/en-US/docs/Web/Accessibility/ARIA/Reference/Attributes/aria-current#true)
